Below is an application for 'services.int', a server that global opers
will have access to in order to jupe servers in extreme situations.
Obviously, this server is very different than normal servers that
apply, so this is being sent to admins to vote.  Most of the
new-server-guidelines is not relevent to this server, so I won't
be using it.  I obviously don't want to give away many details about
where this server will be running, anyway.  I trust that everyone will
assume that it is on ample hardware and decent connectivity.  Note,
this server will not be running in the same location as
irc.concentric.net or services.us.  Obviously, its IP will need to
remain hidden, so I will not be specifying an IP address. 'services.int'
will have links to all of the hub servers that have full H:'s for
redundancy.  Those hub servers will need to hide services.int's IP
from everyone, including opers.  The IP should *never* be transmitted
over IRC.  This likely means that the hub servers will need to run
some sort of proxy that proxies connections to localhost, such that
the IP will show up as 127.0.0.1 on IRC.  (Most servers still show the
real IP to opers, which is why the proxy is needed.)  I, comstud,
will be releasing a proxy program to the public in the next few
days which is easy to configure for IRC.  (Details on that will be
sent to admins upon release.  At that time, I will encourage every
server to use it, anyway, to hide IPs.)

The admins of 'services.int' will be Taymie Gaver Behrens 
(tay@katnap.org) and myself, Chris Gaver Behrens (cbehrens@codestud.com).
The admin email address for the server is tay@katnap.org. 

Purpose:  To allow Admins and Global opers the ability to jupe a server
if, and only if, the server in question meets the following criteria
and no other solution is suitable at the time.  IT GOES WITHOUT SAYING 
THAT A JUPE IS A _LAST RESORT_.

Note: In the future, this server could be used for other approved
global access priviledges for admins and/or opers, also.  Ie, it
could be used to do more than jupe, if something is approved in the
future.

Reasons to jupe:

This is an emergency mechanism which should be used ONLY in the
following circumstances:
         1.  server possibly/is compromised/hacked
         2.  O-lines compromised, nobody around to dline/etc locally
         3.  trouble with route which breaks the network, causing splits

How it will work:

A jupe command will need to be sent to 'services.int' in order to
jupe a server.  Likewise, to unjupe, an unjupe command will need to
be sent.  3 admin requests or 5 global oper requests (from 3 or 5
*UNIQUE* servers respectively) will need to be made for a jupe to be
activated or deactivated.  5 global opers on 1 server will not be able
to jupe or unjupe a server.  For those that have access to more than
one server, taking advantage of that to jupe a server will be
considered ABUSE.  If someone simply /squits a jupe, it will
'reconnect'.  An unjupe command will need to be issued for the jupe to
go away.

If not enough requests have been met to activate a jupe after 30
minutes from the first request, the request(s) are forgotten.  Ie,
after the first request is made, you have 30 minutes to find other
opers and admins to issue a request.

All jupe/unjupe requests from non-global opers will be ignored.  You
must be opered (globally) in order for 'services.int' to listen to your
jupe request.  That includes admin requests, which I describe below.

'services.int' will contain a database of logins for the admins
(so that it can recognize admin requests vs oper requests).  Each
login will have a password and a set of user@host/server pairs.
For 'services.int' to recognize an admin, a username and password must
be specified with the jupe command.  If the username/password does not
match an entry in 'services.int''s database, the request will be denied.
If the user@host or the server of the oper issuing the request does
not match an allowed user@host/server combination for that username,
the request will be denied.

An example could be:

login comstud {
	password "encrypted-pass";
	allow {
		cbehrens@irc-w1.concentric.net ircd-w.concentric.net;
		cbehrens@irc.concentric.net irc.concentric.net;
	};
};
login tay {
	password "encrypted-pass";
	allow tay@katnap.org irc.concentric.net;
};

The above would recognize the following admins if the passwords
are given correctly:

login of tay:
   user@host has to be tay@katnap.org and ircing from irc.concentric.net
login of comstud:
   user@host has to be cbehrens@irc-w1.concentric.net and ircing
     from ircd-w.concentric.net
  *OR*
   user@host has to be cbehrens@irc.concentric.net and ircing from
     irc.concentric.net

Note, for the 'comstud' login, a user@host of
    cbehrens@irc-w1.concentric.net ircing from ircd-w.concentric.net
    would result in a denied request.

Global opers who are not admins will not specify a login/password with
their jupe requests.

'services.int' will be logging all requests and any abuse found will
be acted upon IMMEDIATELY.  Sending jupe requests just to see what will
happen, and any other type of misuse will be considered abuse.

ANY admin that does not feel each one of their global opers can handle
this access responsibly, should immediately demote or remove those
opers.  They should not have been opered to begin with! =)

How abuse of 'services.int' will be handled:

First Offense for OPERS:
1.  The offending server will have its access suspended for a period of
    six months.
2.  The admin of the server will be required to demote the offending
    oper/admin to local o for a period of six months

**The Admin/s will still have their admin access to jupe**.

Second Offense for OPERS:
1.  The offending server will have its access suspended for a period of
    one year.
2.  The admin will be required to remove the offending oper entirely, 
    and blacklisted from that server.  If the abuser has access to 
    other servers, those server admins will be asked to demote or 
    remove that user.

First Offense for ADMINS:
1.  Access suspended for 1 year from 'services.int' for the server.
   
Second Offense for ADMINS:
2.  Call for vote to delink that admins server.

**An OPER who's oline is hacked and used to abuse 'services.int' will not
  be punished... unless of course they give abusers access intentionally ;)

Accidents can happen, and *true* accidents will not be punished... and if we 
have to bring a vote before the admins to determine if there was a true
accident, we will.  Fair is fair =)

That's it.  Happy voting.
