EFNet Hostname Spoofing Policy Proposal
William Rockwood, 14 May, 2001
Updated, 16 May, 2001
---

PURPOSE:

To create an enforceable, fair, pragmatic policy to serve as 
the definitive guideline for hostname spoofing on EFNet.


DESCRIPTION:

Forged hostnames have become an effective method for deflecting
Denial of Service attacks against server operators and admins,
as well as the privileged few who are friends with admins.  Until
now, there have been only contradictory views regarding hostname
spoofing.  This proposal is intended to sharpen the line between
what is, and what is not, acceptable use of our abilities to create
forged hostnames.  For the purpose of this document, a forged or
otherwise obscured hostname will be referred to as a "spoof."


OVERVIEW:

Spoofs shall be permitted so long as they do not in any way display
negligence or intentional infringement on the rights of the domain
owner.  That is, to be very clear, spoofs of non-existant TLDs or of
hosts on a domain which the admin or oper/user maintains control will 
be allowed after ownership has been verified by sending an e-mail to 
the administrative contact of the domain in question.  Server admins 
may, at their discretion, create a spoof under the same domain as their
server.  Spoofing hosts on domains which the admin or spoof holder
can not exhibit ownership will not be permitted, with the exception of
non-existant domains which nobody is capable of possessing.

Numeric spoofs will not be permitted unless they are all 0's (0.0.0.0) 
or all 1's (255.255.255.255) or fall within RFC1918 address space 
(10/8, 172.16/12, 192.168/16,) or if the spoofed address falls within
netspace owned by the admin or user.  The final limitation is for 
spoofs which are actually resolvable hostnames.  They may -not- resolve 
to addresses which are not a part of the end-user or admins network 
unless they resolve to loopback (127/8) or RFC1918 space.


EXAMPLES:

User Joe wants "ride.thehappyrainbow.com" to be his hostname.
JoeUser is the administrative contact for 'thehappyrainbow.com' and
after verifying this by sending a mail to the contact address and
getting an affirmative response, the admin of the server can add the
spoof.

User Jeff wants "owns.a.ton.of.csco.com" but is not associated
with the administration of the domain 'csco.com' in any way.  The
server admin can not add this spoof.

User Sara wants "ridingthebigcows.com" to be her hostname.  Since
this domain does not (at the time this proposal was written) exist, 
the server admin can not add this spoof.

User Sally wants "i.am.hot" to be her hostname (she runs the
channel #hotties and is known for her willingness to go on dates
with server admins.)  Since there is no '.hot' TLD, this spoof is
valid and the server admin can add it.

User Fred wants his spoof to be an actual IP address for whatever
reason (less memorable, perhaps.) Since Fred runs a large network,
and owns a number of routable netblocks, he chooses an IP that is
not routed for abuse purposes--so his users, should they do abusive
things, can be held responsible for their actions.  This is an 
acceptable spoof, the server admin can add it after verifying that
Fred is the administrator (or has permission from the administrator)
of that netblock.


LIMITATIONS:

Common sense should be used when creating spoofs.  Obviously, creating 
a spoof "packet.kiddies.are.dumb.they.can.wank.off," while still a
valid spoof, would not be recommended.  It should be left to the admin
of a server whether they wish to use childish hostnames or not.  It
should be noted, however, that since peer-review is always occurring
on EFNet, they would likely be looked upon with derision were they to 
make a habit of using or allowing spoofs with negative connotations such
as racism or other obscene or profane language. 


